I have students who come to school after
a weekend where mom or dad were dragged
to jail because of domestic violence
we're dealing with children who have
drug and alcohol in their families we're
dealing with homeless children there are
many families who are suffering from
depression and the parents are not
really available to the students we have
single parent families where in order
just to maintain the basics of food
clothing and shelter mom has to work or
dad 24/7
as a principal assistant at Bemis which
is a pretty good size high poverty high
needs school in Spokane schools it's a
title one school we have over 250 of our
kids that we know come to school with
trauma and that's out of 480 kids when
we talk about complex trauma what we're
really referring to is a cluster of
experiences that kids are going through
typically in their family environment
although you could be also looking at
things like community violence school
violence violence against peers but the
hallmark of the experience is that the
trauma is persistent but it's episodic
which means that kids always have to be
anticipating that next bad thing that's
going to be happening to them the field
of understanding how it affects learning
and how it affects brain development is
fairly new students generally have
trouble or can have trouble with
relationships and attachment another
would be behavior and the inability to
self-regulate their behavior so we see
attention deficit disorder and you might
see oppositional defiant disorder you
may see just a withdrawal and a just
complete detachment for some kids in the
school environment so it's you're gonna
see it manifest in many different ways
you know I think we always knew there
were that kids are bringing issues to
school and we've always known that there
were problems and we know of kids that
have issues that come to school and
we've always expected them to leave
those those little bags at the front
door and come on in and read we're going
to do this we're going to do that and
now we know that that can't happen
most people connect trauma with just
trauma they don't understand the
difference between post-traumatic stress
disorder and this thing called complex
trauma as we looked at this I think all
of us have been looking for years for an
idea and a set of terms which helps
integrate a whole variety of experiences
which we know have adverse impacts on
children and have the capacity to create
lifelong trajectories of difficulty and
failure to succeed in school inability
to hold a job some people would say a
trajectory even even the present and
about 10 years ago a man by the name of
Bessel Vander Kolk made the
differentiation between post-traumatic
stress disorder and complex trauma
supported by the science of neuro
development I mean we can see how it is
that these adverse childhood experiences
actually create different biology inside
a child's brain which results in
different kind of brain chemistry
physical chemistry which really is the
basis for human behavior and how it is
that we have the capacity or don't have
the capacity to respond to the kinds of
challenges that are that are put in
front of us trauma and trauma exposure
and the impacts of traumatic stress have
usually been thought of this kind of a
clinical problem with the clinical set
of responses so kids who have
post-traumatic stress disorder or adults
who have post-traumatic stress disorder
and they go and they see a therapist and
then they're treated with a set of
clinical interventions and that's where
it stops and so we typically think of
our formal systems our mental health
treatment systems our child welfare
systems as the systems that are going to
be the ones that respond to the kids
that have this need but what we know is
that most of the kids who are
experiencing this stuff don't ever reach
those formal systems in fact one in five
kids actually has a diagnosable mental
disorder in this country in the general
population but less than 10% of
kids actually ever receive the service
and so what we started to look at was
how do we get this information out into
the general community particularly to
the systems that have universal access
to all kids and that's what brought us
into the early learning environments in
particularly to k-12 education because a
lot of kids have a lot of stuff going on
with them and they're all going to bring
it to school it really comes down to
this very simply put it's to help
children be able to create attachments
help children learn how to regulate
themselves and their behavior and it's
to help children learn how to gain the
confidence from having gained
competencies what we did was we begin
building curriculum building training
and began working with schools and
school districts around how it is that
this information is relevant to a major
issue that they encounter which is this
issue of social emotional learning and
children how do they engage with
children who were experiencing
difficulty inside k12 and and other
kinds of settings
they found it immediately relevant these
people these folks who worked very very
hard in almost impossible circumstances
because of the expectations that are
currently on on people in k-12 were very
eager for a set of ideas and an approach
that was integrative across the silos if
you will that they work with that
I do believe there's hope I think the
hope lies in educating staff in
strategies that do work for kids WSU has
been able to come in and do some quite a
bit of staff training we've done
training with teachers whole staff in
some buildings administrators counselors
our mental health therapists social
workers instructional support
specialists and so we're trying to get
the information and knowledge out so
that they can then go back to their
buildings and work with teachers in the
classrooms and and take a look at
strategies that'll be more effective for
kids my role I would say over 75% of it
is with discipline and that I think that
is one way that the complex trauma has
changed our practice here at Bemis
because it used to be that discipline
was walking through steps three pinks
nun a white slip that the phone call
home that's a consequence and now we
know that that doesn't work
our kids are already experiencing trauma
they don't need more trauma from
consequences that are might be
unrealistic so right now we're looking
at every kid we're looking at their
experiences we're looking at how they
handle consequences how they handle
their daily things that come up in their
lives they need to be held accountable
but we need to do it in a way that
validates where they're coming from
validates their their trauma that
they're going through and yet shows them
that here's the expectation and here's
your accountability piece but we still
care about you the initial response to
the work on complex trauma has been oh
my gosh I needed this I get it it's it's
so impactful for people who have perhaps
never really thought about the
implications of trauma and kids ability
to learn and and those people be they
teachers or administrators completely
understand and feel I think like it's in
a ha of course that's what's going on
for children and then they want more and
they want more and they want more and
they want
what's been most important for me is I
have come up with the term my trauma
lens which I think I've always had I
thought I was pretty sensitive to trauma
but I really wasn't till this year and
it's been huge as far as handling
different situations
I used to why results I wanted to walk
over I wanted what I said to be listened
to and I wanted what I said to be done
to be done right away and if it didn't
happen the night we just I would just
battle with that student and now I
approach it before like how can I help
this student not just with this
assignment but with whatever's actually
happening in their life it's made all
the difference in the world this year so
I have way more respect from my students
and I'm respecting them a lot more too
you